Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2022  
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor  BOTSWANA  2022 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT  
EXECUTIVE  SUMMARY  
Botswana is a constitutional , multiparty , republican democracy.  Its constitution 
provides for  the indirect election of a president and the popular election of a 
National Assembly.  The Botswana Democratic Party has held a  majority in the  
National Assembly since the nation’s founding in 1966.  In 2019 , President 
Mokgweetsi Masisi won his first full five -year term in an election that outside 
observers deemed  free and fair.   The Botswan a Police Service, which reports to the 
Ministry of Defense  and Security, has primary responsibility for internal security.  
The Botswana Defense Force, which reports to the Office of the President through 
the minister of d efense  and security , has some domestic security responsibilities.  
The Directorate of  Intelligence and Security Services, which also  reports to the 
Office of the President, collects and evaluates external and internal intelligence, 
provides personal protection to high- level government officials, and advises the 
presidency and government on matters of national security.   Civilian a uthorities 
maintained effective control over the security forces.  Members of the security 
forces committed some abuses.  
Significant human rights is sues included credible reports of :  arbitrary or unlawful 
interference with privacy ; serious restrictions on free expression  and media , 
including an unjustified arrest or prosecution of journalists; serious  government 
corruption; and the existence of the worst forms of child labor . 
The government took steps to prosecute officials who committed abuses or were 
implicated in corruption .  Impunity was generally not a problem . 
Section 1.  Respect for the Integrity of the Person  
a.Arbitrary Deprivation of Li fe and O ther Unlawful or Politically
Motivated Killings
There were no report s the government or its agents committed arbitrary or 
unlawful killing s. 
b. Disappearance  
There were no reports of disapp earances by or on behalf of government authorities. 
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment , and Other Related Abuses  
The constitution and law prohibit such practices, and there were no  reports of 
government officials employing such tactics .  Some laws prescribe corporal 
punishment for convicted offenders  in both criminal and customary courts.  H uman 
rights groups viewed these provisions as cruel and degrading ; the Court of Appeals 
ruled  these provisions do not violate the constitution’ s provisions on torture or 
inhuman treatmen t. 
Prison and Detention Center Conditions  
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center conditions 
that raised human rights concerns.  Prison and detention center conditions 
generally met international standards. 
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Authorities  occasionally held juveniles with adults 
generally for a few days while the juveniles await ed transport. 
Administration :  Authorities investigated credible allegations  of inhuman 
conditions  brought by inm ates against prison officials and took disciplinary or 
judicial action against persons responsible for abuses.  T he law require s the 
minister of defense  and security to appoint a committee to visit prisons on a 
quarterly basis and allows religious authorit ies to visit with prisoners.  The 
government enforced this law.  
Independent Monitoring :  The government generally allowed international and 
local nongovernmental organizations ( NGOs ) to meet with prisoners, and it 
permitted independent human rights observers to visit prisons .  The International 
Committee of the Red Cross visited prison s.  Representatives of diplomatic 
missions were also allowed access to the F rancistown Cent re for Illegal 
Immigrants, a dedicated fa cility for  detaining migrants. 
Page 2
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention 
The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary arrest and detention and provide for the 
right of any person to challenge his or her detention in court.  While the 
government generally observed these prohibitions, compliance was not universal. 
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees  
The law also requires authorities to inform suspects of their rights upon arrest, 
including the right to remain silent, and requires authorities to file charges before a 
magistrate within 48 hours.  
Upon arrest, police must produce an arrest warrant issued by a duly authorized 
magistrate upon the presentation of compelling evidence, except in certain cases, 
such as when an officer witnesses a crime being committed or discovers a suspect is in possession of a controlled substance.  Directorate of Intelligence and Security Services ( DISS) personnel have the power to enter premises and make arrests 
without warrants if the agency suspects a person has committed or is about to 
commit a crime (see also section 2.a.). 
Those arrested or detained have the  right to an attorney during the first 48 hours 
after arrest and the right to arraignment before a magistrate.  A magistrate may 
order a suspect held for 14 days thr ough a writ of detention that  may be further 
renewed  every 14 days.  
The law provides for a prompt judicial determination of the legality of a person’ s 
detention.  H eavy court caseloads occasionally delayed this determination. 
The country  has a functioning bail system , and detention without bail was unusual 
except in murder  cases, where it is mandatory.  Detainees have the right to contact 
a family member and hire attorneys of their choice , but most could not afford legal 
counsel.  
Arbitrary Arres t:  The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary arrest and detention 
and provide for the right of any person to challenge his or her detention in court.  
Overall, authorities generally respected these rights and legal requirements, 
although some complaints of violated rights have arisen related to  DISS ’s exercise 
Page 3
of its arrest powers. 
On March 18, the Directorate of Intelligence and Security Services arrested a n 
opposition  member of parliament and his brother for 48 hours without any warrant 
or charges.  The two were denied legal representation during their incarceration.  
On June 7, DISS arrested the legal adviser for the Directorate on Corruption and 
Economic Crime ’s (DCEC).  DISS’s actions were a continuation of ongoing 
political tensions between DISS and the DCEC, whose director general previously took DISS to court over accusations that DISS had attempted to confiscate files regarding  corruption investigations into DISS officials.  The adviser had previously 
filed a supporting affidavit in the case filed by DCEC opposing attempts from DISS to access the case files.  
Pretrial Detention :  A writ of pretrial detention is valid for 14 days and is 
renewable every 14 days.   Some detainees , however,  waited several weeks or 
months between the filing of charges and the start of their trials.  Pretrial detention 
in murder , rape, livestock theft, and robbery cases sometimes exceeded a year, but 
there were no reports of instances in which the length of detention equaled or 
exceeded the sentences actually imposed.   Pretrial detainees comprised 22.5  
percent (2021 data) of prisoners , according to the NGO World Prison Brief .  
Delays were largely due to judicial staffing shortages and a backlog of pending 
cases . 
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial 
The constitution and law provide for an independent judiciary , and the government 
generally respected judicial independence  and impartiality, but there were a few 
reports of executive overreach in a few high-profile cases .  These included an 
executive branch attempt to influence the trial outcome of a former minister 
accused of murder.  Further, a tribal chief claimed that the presidency warned her that it would intervene in a case involving a dispute between the Balete tribe and 
the government. 
Trial Procedures  
The constitution and  law provide for the right to a fair  and public  trial, and an 
Page 4
independent judiciary generally enforced this right.  Trials in civil ian courts are 
public, although trials under the National Security Act may be secret.  Defendants 
have the right to be present and to consult with an attorney in a timely manner .  In 
capital cases, the government provides legal counsel or private attorneys to work 
pro bono for indigent clients.  Courts tried those charged with noncapital crimes 
without legal representation if the defendant could not afford an attorney.  A s a 
result , many defendants were not aware  of their procedural rights in  pretrial or trial 
proceedings.  Some NGOs provided free but limited legal assistance.  
A customary or traditional court system exists in addition to the formal court 
system .  According to traditional practice, a tribal chief presides over most small 
villages.  While customary ( traditional) courts enjoy ed widespread citizen support 
and respect, they often did not afford  the same due process protections as the 
formal court system.  D efendants do not have legal counsel, and there are no 
standardized rules of evidence.  The quality of decisions reached in the customary courts varied considerably , and defendants often lacked a presumption of 
innocence.  Tribal judges applied corporal punishment, such as lashings on the 
buttocks , more often than did formal courts . 
A separate military court system does not try civilians.  Military courts have separate procedures from civilian  courts .  Defendants in military courts may have 
their cases transferred to the civilian judicial system.  In a ddition , military 
personnel may sue other military personnel in civilian civil court . 
Political Prisoners and Detainees 
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.  
Civil Judicial Procedures and Remedies  
In the formal judicial system, there is an independent and impartial judiciary in 
civil matters, including for human rights cases, which includes a separate industrial court for most labor -related cases.  Administrative remedies were not widely 
available.  By mutual agreement of the parties involved, customary courts, which handle land, marital, and property disputes, tried most civil cases, but they often 
did not afford  the same  due p rocess  protections as the formal judicial system .  
Abuses in customary courts could be reviewed by the formal court system.   
Page 5
Although individuals and organizations may file complaints regarding domestic 
decisions with the African Commission on Human and Pe oples’ Rights,  the 
country  has not ratified the protocol that established the court , and the country  did 
not always implement the court’s rulings . 
f. Arbitrary  or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, 
or Correspondence 
The constitution and law prohibit interference with privacy, family, home, or 
correspondence , but there were reports th at DISS had developed capabilities for 
online surveillance . 
A law enacted in February  that gave  security forces broad wiretapping powers and 
the ability to carry out unchecked undercover  law enforcement operations, faced 
widespread condemnation from civil society over an encroachment on civil 
liberties.  The law allows authorities to conduct wiretaps, compels communications 
companies to provide access and share data under threat of prosecution, allows for 
the creation of fake identifications in the national register, and gives authorities  
immunity on actions related to undercover operations.  Journalists, human rights 
organizations, labor unions, a s well as opposition lawmakers and lawyer s’ 
organizations attacked the law , declaring it would allow unfettered interference in 
areas such as journalism, attorney -client pr ivilege, and could even be a pretext for 
tampering with elections.  The government stated the law  was intended to address 
concerns raised by the Financial Action Task Force over illicit currency flows.  
The law was later amended to remove warrantless wiretaps and instead establish ed 
an oversight committee  for surveillance . 
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties  
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for  Members of the Press  and 
Other Media  
The constitution and law provide for freedom of expression, including for the press 
and other media .  With some exceptions , the government generally respected th e 
rights of freedom of s peech and press.  
Page 6
Freedom of Expression :  The law restricts the speech of some government 
officials and fines persons found guilty of insulting public officials or national 
symbols .  The law states, “ Any person in a public place or at a public gathering 
(who) uses abusive, obscene , or insulting language in relation to the P resident , any 
other member of the National Assembly, or any public officer ” is guilty of an 
offense and may receive a substantial monetary fine .  The law also states that any 
person who insults the country ’s coat of arms, flag, presidential standard, or 
national anthem is guilty of an offense and may receive a substantial monetary fine 
under the sedition clause .  The Constitutional Court has not considered the 
constitutionality of the sedition clause.  
Violence and Harassment:   On July 13, journalist Tshepo Sethibe of the news site  
Moeladilotlhoko News Boiler  was arrested, along with a traditional doctor, and 
accused  of reporting misinformation regarding  the disappearance of a boy  age six , 
and thereby  of inciting pe rsons  to riot.   Sethibe was charged with alarming the 
public.  His cell phones were confiscated but he was released the next day.   In 
January  2021, the Botswana Police Service (BPS) in Phitshane  Molopo  (a border 
town between South Africa and Botswana) arrested Sethibe and Michelle Teise, a 
fellow journalist employed by the news site.  Police charged them with criminal 
trespass but dropped the charges in April 2021.  
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other 
Media, Including Online Media :  Some members of civil society organizations 
stated the government occasionally censored news stories  it deemed undesirable in 
government-run media .  Government and private journalists sometimes practiced 
self-censorship.  
Libel/Slander  Laws :  There were no arrests or convictions under these  laws (see 
the above subsection on Freedom of Expression) during the year .  The law 
criminalizes insults to religion, as well as comments or writings intended to wound 
others’ religious feelings.  There were no reports of prosecutions or convictions 
under these provisions during the year.  
Internet Freedom  
The governmen t did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor online 
Page 7
content , and there  were no credible reports  the government monitor ed private 
online communications without appropriate legal authority. 
b. Freedom s of Peaceful Assembly and Association  
The constitution and law provide for the freedom s of assembly and association, 
and the government generally respected these rights, al though there were 
restrictions on the ability of labor unions to organize and strike (s ee section 7.a.). 
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly  
On June 13, police arrested Pastor Thuso Tiego  after he was found demonstrating 
in front of foreign- owned shops, forcing them temporarily to close.  The pastor 
complained that the country was facing a serious unemployment situation because 
foreigners had taken jobs that could be reserved for locals.  He was arrested and released without charge.  In September  2021,  police detained Tiego  on charges of 
holding a political demonstration without a permit.  
On June 13, police used force to disperse angry residents of Lobatse who protested the purported ritual killing of a boy age d six.  Three police officers were injured, 
and four police vehicles were damaged.  Approximately 10 persons were arrested 
for questioning.  
c. Freedom of Religion 
See the Department of State ’s International Religious Freedom Report  at 
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/ . 
d. Freedom of Movement  and the Right to Leave the Country  
The constitution and law provide for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these rights.  
e. Protection of Refugees  
The government generally cooperated with the U N High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian or ganizations in providing protection 
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as other 
Page 8
persons of concern. 
Access to Asylum :  The law provides for the granting of asylum or refugee status, 
and the government has established a system for providing protection to refugees.  
The system for granting refugee status was accessible but slow.  The government 
generally provided protection against the expulsion or return of persons to 
countries where their lives or freedom would be thr eatened on account of their 
race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.  
The government held asylum seekers in the Francistown Centre for Illegal 
Immigrants (FCII ) detention facility until the Refugee Advisory Committee, a 
governmental body, ma de a refugee status determination .  The committee  met 
quarterly .  UNHCR representative s participated in advisory committee meetings as 
observer s and technical adviser s. 
Safe Country of Origin/Transit :  The government applied the principle of first 
country of asylum .  On that basis, in previous years it detained individuals, many 
of whom had refugee status in a third country and then claimed asylum.  
Freedom of Movement :  As a general policy, all registered refugees must reside 
in Dukwi Refugee Camp under a strict encampment policy.  The government may 
issue a residence permit to remain outside the camp in exceptional cases, such as for refugees enrolled at a university, in need of specialized medical care, or with 
unique skills.  
Employment :  In August,  UNHCR reported that most  of the country’ s 841 
registered refugees were living in the Dukw i Refugee Camp  and did not have  the 
right to work outside the camp. 
Access to Basic Services:  Refugees at  the Dukw i Refugee Camp had access to 
education and basic health  care services .  UNHCR facilitate d refugee and asylum  
seeker s’ exit permit applications for medical referrals, as necessary.  Officials 
typically granted  exit permits  for three days ; refugees found outside the camp 
without a permit were subject to arrest. 
Asylum seekers with children were transferred to Dukwi Refugee Camp  from 
Page 9
FCII.  International observers expressed concern that young children were 
sometimes separated from  their parents in the FCII facility while their cases were 
processed.  In one case , this included a family with eight minor children.  
International obser vers stated there was no access to education in the FCII, which, 
during the year , held more than 200  children  younger than  age 18.  The center 
hosted a clinic, and a specialized nurse provide d basic health care, while critical 
cases were referred to the Francistown city public hospital.  
The government considered the FCII to be a less than ideal transi t center for 
asylum seekers; however, there were reports of asylum seekers  who spent several 
years detained in FCII while awaiting review of their cases.  Although the 
government moved remaining long- term asylum seekers to the nearby Dukwi 
Refugee Camp  in 2019 , it did not establish a protocol to prevent new arrivals from 
spending long periods in FCII while their cases were processed.  International 
refugee groups reported that an average of 50 to 60 persons were held in the FCII 
at any given time while awaiting refugee processing.  
Temporary Protection :  The government provided temporary protection at the 
Dukw i Refugee Camp to  individuals who may not qualify as refugees under the 
1951 UN Refugee Convention or its 1967 Protocol.   UNHCR provided food and 
other provisions  to individuals under temporary protection. 
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process  
The law provide s citizens the ability  to choose  their government in free and fair 
periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal suffrage. 
Elections and Political Participation 
Recent Elections :  The Botswana Democratic Party  won a majority in the 2019  
parliamentary elections, returning President Mokgweetsi Masisi to office for a  full 
five-year term and continuing  the party ’s control of the  government dating from  
independence in 1966.   Outside observers generally considered the vote credible .  
Using COV ID-19 state of e mergency  powers , the government postponed 
indefinitely 11 special elections , scheduled f rom 2019 onwards , for district council 
seats to replace lawmakers who died.  These elections took place in December  
Page 10
2021.  Three other council wards ’ by-elections have been held since.  
Political Parties and Political Participation :  In 2020 , the National Assembly 
suspended the  officially designated l eader of the opposition , Dumelang 
Saleshando,  for one week for accusing  members of President Masisi ’s family of 
improperly  manipulating the government tendering process.  The speaker of the 
National Assembly, who was appointed by the president , called for the  suspension 
vote.  In August  2021, the High Court ruled that the s peaker ’s action  was irrational 
and unprocedural because  he violated Saleshando ’s constitutional rights to freedom 
of expression and speech as a duly elected representative.   In June , the opposition 
coalition, which include d Saleshando’ s party, suspended Saleshando as its vice 
president and replaced Saleshando as the official parliamentary Leader of the 
Opposition.  
Participation of Women and Members of Minorit y Groups :  No laws limit the 
participation of women and members of minority groups in the political process, 
and they did participate .  Nevertheless, observers suggested the  lack of support 
from political parties, fundraising challenges, and cultural constraints , including 
the sexual exploitation of women in politics,  limit ed the number of women in 
government.  
While the constitution formally recognizes eight principal tribes of the Tswana 
nation, amendments to the constitution also allow minority tribes to be represented 
in the House of Chiefs.  T he law provide s that members from all trib es enjoy equal 
rights .  Outside observers noted many tribes we re unrecognized or unrepresented, 
and women we re underrepresented in the traditional chieftaincy system.   The 
government does not recognize any group or tribe as indigenous . 
The election authority makes accommodation  for persons with disabilities during 
voting, including providing ballots in braille upon request  and installing temporary 
ramps at polling places .  During the 2019 national election, polling places were 
established i n the Central Kalahari Game Reserve, an area inhabited primarily by 
Indigenous groups.  There are no restrictions on  lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons seeking to take part in the 
political process.  
Page 11
Section 4. Corrupt ion and Lack of Transparency in 
Government 
The law provides criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the government 
generally sought to implement these laws effectively.  Officials tasked with 
enforcement lacked adequate training and resource s, although media reports of 
government corruption continued .  During the year  there were isolated media 
reports of government corruption .  A 2019 poll by Transparency International 
found that 7 percent of those polled had paid bribes to government officials, an 
increase from the 1 percent who reported paying bribes in a 2015 poll. 
Corruption :  On June 14, DISS arrested and interrogated its Deputy Director 
General, Tefo Kgotlhane, for a day.  Media reports claimed that Kgotlhane was 
arrested in connection with corruption allegations in government tenders.  
In August 2021, a court also dismissed a case against Welheminah Mphoeng Maswabi, a former DISS agent accused of facilitating a $10 billion theft of bonds from the Bank of Botswana by former Presiden t Ian Khama and Isaac Kgosi – the 
Director General of DISS under Ian Khama.  Neither Kgosi nor Khama were 
charged in the case, although government court filings in Maswabi ’s case 
implicated the pair.  Khama responded by filing a formal complaint in April 2 021 
against government investigators, alleging the investigators committed perjury by naming him in Maswabi ’s case.  On August 5, the Court of Appeal ruled against 
the High Court, arguing that Maswabi has a case to answer and should stand trial.  
In 2020 , the former permanent secretary to Presidents Khama and Masisi, Carter 
Morupisi, and his wife stood trial on charges of abuse of office, money laundering, 
and receiving bribes.  On October 31, the High Court found Morupisi guilty while 
his wife was fo und not guilty.  The court sentenced Morupisi on November 30 to a 
two-year suspended prison sentence and fines totaling 130,000 pula ($ 10,800).   
Some observers regard ed the sentence as relatively light.  Minister of Youth, 
Sports,  and Culture Tumiso Rakgare post ed on his Facebook page, “We trust the 
process but...are we saying it ’s ok to loot, it ’s ok to steal, it’s ok?   What message 
are we sending? ” 
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards International and 
Page 12
Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human 
Rights 
The small  number of domestic and international human rights groups generally 
operated without government restriction, investigating and publishing their 
findings on human rights cases.  Government officials were generally cooperative 
and responsive to domestic NGO views on most subjects.  The government 
interacted with and provided financial support to some domestic organizations.  
Government Human Rights Bodies :  An ombudsperson within the Office of the 
President  handled complaints of maladministration , including some  human rights 
abuses in the public sector , and the government generally cooperated with the 
ombudsperson.  The Office of the Ombudsman, however,  lacked sufficient  staff. 
Section 6. Discrimination  and Societal Abuses  
Women 
Rape and Domestic Violence :  The law criminalizes rape without specifying 
gender  but does not recognize spousal rape as a crime.  By law, formal courts try 
all rape cases  and the minimum sentence for conviction of rape is 10 years 
imprisonment ; the sentence increases to 15 years with corporal punishment if the 
offender was unaware of being HIV- positive ; and increases to 20 years with 
corporal punishment if the offender was aware of being HIV- positive.  A person 
convicted of rape is required to undergo an HIV test before sentencing.  
Authorities effectively enforced laws against rape when victims pressed charges, although police noted victims often declined to press charges against perpetrators.  
In 2019 , the BPS Commissioner announced BPS would no longer allow t he 
withdrawal of gender -based violence cases waiting to be heard by magistrate court.  
In 2020 , President Masisi announced the BPS would establish standard operating 
procedures for dealing with gender -based violence , including establishing 
dedicated units t o handle such cases, establishing a special hotline for victims, and 
requiring victims to be interviewed in private spaces.  In 2020 , the government 
Page 13
introduced special courts to hear gender -based violence cases.  
The law prohibits domestic and other violenc e, whether against women or men, but 
domestic violence remained a serious problem  during the year .  The government 
regularly referred survivors of gender -based violence to a local NGO that ran 
shelters for women.   Although statistics were unavailable, medi a widely reported 
on cases of violence against women, including several high -profile murder  cases. 
In 2020, s helter operators and civil society groups reported a significant increase in 
victims of gender -based violence at the start of the seven- week COVID -19 
lockdown.   The shelter operators noted the situation became more stable but 
gender -based violence remained a significant problem.   Violence remained high 
during the COVID- 19 pandemic .  The government made statements to discourage 
such violence  and devoted extra resources to help shelters address the problem . 
Sexual Harassment :  The law prohibits sexual harassment in both the private and 
public sectors.  Sexual harassment committed by a public officer is considered 
misconduct and is punishable by termination, potentially with forfeiture of all 
retirement benefits, suspension wit h loss of pay and benefits for up to three 
months , reduction in rank or pay, and deferment or stoppage of a pay raise  or 
reprimand.  Nonetheless, sexual harassment, particularly by men in positions of authority,  including teachers, was widespread. 
Reproductive Rights:   There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary 
sterilization on the part of government authorities.  
While awareness of family planning methods was generally high, factors hindering 
contraceptive access included a shortage of  supplies, provider biases, inadequately 
skilled health -care workers, HIV status, culture, religion, and popularly accepted 
myths and misconceptions.  Access to health care during pregnancy and childbirth was widespread, with 95 percent of the population l iving within an average of five 
miles from the nearest health facility.  
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services for survivors of sexual violence, including postexposure prophylaxis, emergency 
contraceptives, counseling, treatment of injuries, and rapid HIV testing.  
Page 14
According to 2019 data, the most recent data set, the country ’s maternal mortality 
ratio was 166 deaths per 100,000 live births.  The leading causes of maternal 
mortality included postpartum hemorrhage, genital tract and pelvic infections 
following unsafe abortion, and ectopic pregnancy.  
Discrimination :  Under the constitution women and men have the same civil 
rights  and legal status .  Under customary law based on tribal practice, however, 
several  traditional laws restricted women ’s property rights and economic 
opportunities, particularly in rural areas.   Women increasingly exercised the right 
to marriage “out of common property, ” in which the y retained their full legal rights 
as adults.   Although labor law prohibits discrimination based on gender and the 
government generally enforced the law effectively, there is no legal requirement  
for women to receive equal pay for equal work. 
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination 
The eight tribes of the Tswana group, wh o speak mutually intelligible dialects of 
Setswana, have been politically dominant since independence, are officially recognized by law, and were granted permanent membership in the House of Chiefs.  Constitutional amendments subsequently enabled the recognition of tribes 
from other groups.  
Indigenous Peoples 
The government does not recognize any group or tribe as indigenous.  
An estimated 50,000 to 60,000 persons belong to one of the many scattered, 
diverse tribal groups known collectively as Basarwa or San.  The Basarwa constituted approximately 3 percent of the population and are culturally and 
linguistically distinct from most other residents.  The law prohibits discriminatio n 
against the Basarwa in employment, housing, health services, or because of cultural practices.  The Basarwa, however, remained marginalized economically and politically and generally did not have access to their traditional land.  The 
Basarwa continued to be geographically isolated, had limited access to education,  
and lacked adequate political representation.  Some members were not fully aware 
of their civil rights.   During the year there were no reported threats to the Basarwa 
Page 15
from business or commercial interests.  
The government interpreted a 2006 High Court ruling against the exclusion of 
Basarwa from traditional lands in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve (CKGR) to 
apply only to the  189 plaintiffs, their spouses, and their minor children.  Many of 
the Basarwa and their supporters continued to object to the government ’s 
interpretation of the court’ s ruling.  
In February, Lesiame Pitseng, a member of the Basarwa tribe, took the governme nt 
to court after it refused him the right to bury his deceased father within the CKRG.  The government argued that the 2006 High Court ruling did not apply to the 
deceased because he had voluntarily resettled outside of the CKGR.  The court 
ordered Pitseng to bury his father outside the CKGR or face 30 days in custody.  He appealed the case and was granted a stay on the execution of the arrest.  The body of the deceased remained  in a morgue pending a legal ruling.  
Government officials maintained that  resettlement programs for Basarwa were 
voluntary  but necessary to facilitate the delivery of public services, provide 
socioeconomic development opportunities to the Basarwa, and minimize human impact on wildlife.  
No government programs directly address discrimination against the Basarwa.  Except for  CKGR lands designated in the 2006 court ruling, there were no 
demarcated cultural lands.  
Children 
Birth Registration :  In general , citizenship is derived from one ’s parents, although 
there are limited circumstances i n which citizenship may be derived from birth 
within the country ’s territory.  The government generally registered births 
promptly .  Unregistered children may be denied some government services, 
including enrollment in secondary schools and national exams.  
Education :  Primary education is tuition -free  for the first 10  years of school but is 
not compulsory.  Parents of secondary school students must cover tuition fee s as 
well as the cost of uniforms and books .  These costs could be waived for children 
whose family income fell below a certain level . 
Page 16
Human rights organizations and minority tribes criticize d the policy  that designates 
English and Setswana as the only officially recognized languages, thereby forcing  
some childre n to learn in a nonnative language.  
In 2018 , the UN special rapporteur on minority issues noted that the lack of mother 
tongue education or failure to incorporate minority languages into the school 
curriculum may constitute discrimination.  
In July , the gov ernment announced the final draft of an education language policy 
to provide guidance on implementation of mother tongue teaching in schools.  The 
government proposed to implement 11 languages for Phase 1 beginning in January.   
A pilot project wa s ongoing in some districts and a public campaign took place in 
October , before rolling it out to the entire country.  
Child Abuse :  The law penalizes neglect and mistreatment  of ch ildren .  There was 
reportedly  widespread abuse of children.  Child abuse was reported to police in 
cases of physical harm to a child.   Police referred  children and, depending on the 
level of abuse, their alleged abuser(s) to counseling in the Department of Social Services within the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development as well 
as to local NGOs.  Police referred s ome cases to the Attorney General’ s Office for 
prosecution.  
On August 10, First Lady Neo Masisi launched the second phase of the “Eseng mo 
Ngwaneng ” campaign under the theme, “Ending Violence Against Children. ”  The 
campaign, in partnership with UNICEF and the government, follow ed growing 
concerns over increasing c ases of violence against children.  The campaign 
promotes reporting violence against children and advocates for cases that involve violence against children to be expedited at all levels.  
Child, Early , and Forced Marriage :  Child marriage occurred infreque ntly and 
was largely limited to certain tribes.  The government does not recognize marriages 
that occur when either party is younger than  the minimum legal age of 18.  
Sexual Exploitation of Children :  The law prohibits  child  sex trafficking and 
sexual abuse of children.  Conviction of sex with a child younger than 18 years  
constitutes defilement (statutory rape)  and is punishable by a minimum of 10 
years ’ incarceration.   The penalty for conviction of not reporting incidents of child 
Page 17
sexual exploitation ranges from a substantial monetary fine to imprisonment for no 
less than two years but no greater than three years, or both.  If convicted, 
perpetrators who engage in sexual exploitation of children are punished with a 
substantial monetary fine , imprisonment f or no less than five years but no longer 
than 15 years, or both.  The law further requires the government to develop 
programs to prevent the sexual exploitation of children.   Child pornography is a 
criminal offense punishable by five to 15 years  of imprisonment.   The government 
generally enforced the law.  
Displaced Children :  Orphans and vulnerable children received government 
support.   Once registered as an orphan,  a child receive s school uniforms, shelter, a 
monthly food basket, and counseling as needed.  
Antisemitism 
There was a very small Jewish population , and t here were no reports of anti semitic  
acts. 
Trafficking in Persons  
See the Department of State ’s Trafficking in Persons Report  at 
https://www.state.gov/trafficking- in-persons- report/ . 
Acts of Violence , Criminalization, and Other Abuses  Based on 
Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or Sex 
Characteristics 
Criminalization:   The High Court ruled in 2019 to decriminalize  same- sex sexual 
conduct.  In November 2021 , the Court of Appeals, the final arbiter,  affirmed th is 
ruling.  In November, the country celebrated the one -year anniversary of 
decriminalization.  The NGO Lesbians Gays and Bisexuals of Botswana (LeGaBiBo ) reported there were no laws forbidding public same sex  displays of 
affection , nor had their members reported any harassment by authorities during the 
year.  
Violence Against LGBTQI+ Persons:   There were incidents of violence, societal 
harassment, and discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity ; 
Page 18
there were no reported cases of authorities investigating abuses against LGBTQI+ 
persons.  The victims of such incidents seldom filed police reports, primarily due 
to stigma but occasionally because of overt official intimidation.  
Discrimination :  The law prohibits discrimination by state and nonstate actors 
based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics  
and recognizes LGBTQI+ individuals.  The High Court ’s 2019 L eGaBiBo 
judgment stated that the Penal Code stigmatized gay men unnecessarily and that 
those provisions had outlived their usefulness and only served to incentivize law 
enforcement agents and others to become intruders into the private spaces of 
citizens .  The judgment concluded that the sections breached  the fundamental right 
to privacy.   In November, a secondary school principal expelled 11 students from a 
boarding school on allegations that the students were lesbians.  The Ministry of 
Education reinstated the students the next day.  The Botswana Network on Ethics, 
Law, and HIV/AIDS  expressed concerns regarding  the school ’s action , noting that 
the decision to expel the students had a discriminatory undertone, based on its 
reference to sexual orientation.  
Availability of Legal Gender  Recognition :  LeGaBiBo championed  efforts to 
push the government to allow individuals to change their gender identity marker on legal and identifying documents to bring them into alignment with their gender identity .  Two individuals had their gender marker s changed in 2017, after they 
took the government to court.
 
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices Specifically 
Targeting LGBTQI+ I ndividuals:   LeGaBiBo reported no known instances of 
conversion “therapy” in the country .  Nonetheless, LeGaBiBo disclosed that a 
family sent one member of a local  LGBTQI+  support group to Nigeria for 
attempted conversion therapy . 
Restrictions of Freedom of E xpression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:   
Public meetings of LGBTQI+ advocacy groups and debates on LGBTQI+ matters 
occurred without disruption or interference.  
In 2016 , the Court of Appeal upheld a 2014 High Court ruling ordering the 
government to register LeGaBiBo formally.  LeGaBiBo has since participated in 
Page 19
government-sponsored events.   Subsequently other  LGBTQI+ groups registered 
successfully.  
Persons with Disabilities  
Persons with disabilities could not always access education, health services, and 
public buildings on an equal basis with others.  The government ’s policy provides 
for integrating the needs of persons with disabilities into all aspects of 
policymaking.  It mandates access to public buildings and transportation, but 
access for persons with disabilities was limited.  Although newer government buildings were constructed to provi de access for persons with disabilities, older 
government office buildings remained largely inaccessible.  Most new privately owned commercial and apartment buildings provided access for persons with disabilities.  The government  at times  provided official  information to persons with 
disabilities in accessible formats .  During the COVID- 19 pandemic, the 
government hosted several national addresses with President Masisi and cabinet ministers but departed from standard procedures by not including a sign langu age 
interpreter provided by Botswana Televisio n. 
Violence against persons with disabilities was not common, and authorities 
punished those who committed violence or abuses against persons with disabilities.  
The law prohibits discrimination against persons with disabilities, but there is no 
specific disability act.  Children with disabilities attended school, although human 
rights NGOs raised concerns the law does not stipulate inclusive education for 
children with disabilities.  Children with disabilities a ttended both public schools 
and segregated schools, depending on resource availability and the wishes of parents.  
In 2018 , the UN special rapporteur on minority issues observed that most teachers 
were not trained in sign language or in teaching methods ada pted to the educational 
needs of deaf persons.  The special rapporteur also noted that the absence of sign 
language interpreters in the health- care sector inhibited the dissemination of 
information.  
The Independent Electoral Commission made some accommodations during 
elections to enable persons with disabilities to vote, including providing ballots in 
Page 20
braille and installing temporary ramps at polling places that were not accessible to 
persons with disabilities . 
There is a Department of Disability Coordinati on in the Office of the President to 
assist persons with disabilities.  The Department of Labo ur in the Ministry of 
Labo ur and Home Affairs is responsible for protecting the rights of persons with 
disabilities in the labor force and investigating claims of  discrimination.  
Individuals may also submit cases directly to the Industrial Court.  The government funded NGOs that provided rehabilitation services and supported small-scale 
projects for workers with disabilities.   During the year parliament passed an 
updated National Policy on Disabilities.  
Section 7. Worker Rights  
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective Bargaining  
The law provides for the rights of workers, except police, military, and prison 
personnel, to form and join registered unions  and to bargain collectively .  The law 
allows some workers to conduct legal strikes.  The law allows registered unions to conduct their activities without interference .  The law places legal restrictions 
limiting the right to form and join independent unions , collective bargaining,  and 
the right to strike, as further outlined below.  Because the law does not protect members of unregistered trade unions, those trying to establish, join, or register a 
trade union have no legal protection from  antiunion discrimination.  
The law imposes restrictions limiting workers’ right to form and join independent trade unions.  An association must have more than 30 worker members to be a 
union, and the law gives the registrar authority to refuse registration upon 
determining that an existing trade union is sufficiently representative of employee interests.  The law also authorizes the registrar to inspect accounts, books, and documents of a trade union at “any reasonable time ” and provides the m inister of 
labour and home affairs with the authority to inspect a trade union “ whenever he 
considers it necessary in the public interest. ”  It also allows the registrar or attorney 
general to apply for an order to restrain any unauthorized or unlawful expenditure of fu nds or use of any trade union property.  Employers and employer associations 
have the legal right to ask the registrar to withdraw recognition of a union, and the 
Page 21
Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs has the right to suspend a union if it is “in 
the public interest, ” although the former practice was uncommon, and the latter has 
never been employed.  Any person acting or purporting to act as an officer of a trade union or federation that fails to apply for registration within 28 days of its formation is subject to sanctions.  
Trade unions failing to meet formal registration requirements are automatically 
dissolved and banned from carrying out union activities.  
The law provides for collective bargaining only for unions that have enrolled at 
least one-third  of an employer or industry ’s workforce.   The law does not allow 
employers or employers ’ organizations to interfere in the establishment, 
functioning , or administration of trade unions.   The law provides a  framework for 
either employers  or unions  to nullify collective bargaining agreements and 
provides a mechanism for the other party to dispute the nullification.  The law also 
permits an employer or employers’ organization to apply to the government to withdraw the recognition granted a trade union if it establishes that the trade union 
refuses to negotiate in good faith with the employer . 
The law prohibits employees who provide “essential services ” from striking.  The 
law limits its definition of essential services to  aviation, health, electrical, water 
and sanitation, fire , and air traffic control services .  Police, military, and prison 
personnel are not permitted to form or join unions, but they are allowed employee 
associations that communicate collective needs and concerns to their government 
employer.  Union representatives reported employee associations were generally 
not as effective as unions in resolving labor dispute s. 
The law empowers t wo officials within the Ministry of Labou r and Home Affairs , 
the minister and the commissioner of labour, to refer a dispute in essential services 
to arbitration or to the Industrial Court for determination. 
Civil service disputes are referred to an ombudsperson  for resolution, and the 
ombudsperson generally made decisions without government  interference.  Labor 
commissioners mediate private labor disputes, which,  if not resolved within  30 
days, may be  referred to the Industrial Court.  
Workers who are members of registered unions may not be terminated for legal 
Page 22
union -related activities.  Dismissals may be appealed to civil court s or lab or 
officers, which have  rarely ordered payment of more than two months’ severance 
pay.  The law does not provide for reinstatement of workers, but a judge may order 
reinstatement if the termination  is deemed to be related to union activities.  T he 
law does not provide protection to public employees’ organizations from acts of 
interference by public authorities in their establishment or administration. 
The government enforced some labor law s but did not protect the  freedom of 
association for workers.  In add ition, the government placed significant barriers to 
union organizing and operations, and there were some restrictions on the right to 
collective bargaining.  The government has not acted  to revive the Public Sector 
Bargaining Council.  Workers exercised the right to form and join unions , and 
employers generally did not use hiring practices to avoid hiring workers with 
bargaining rights.   Legal penalties for violations of laws governing freedom of 
association were commensurate with those for othe r laws involving denials of civil 
rights.   Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  
The law severely restricts the right to strike, and strikes were rare.  When unions 
followed legal requirements , exhausted  arbitration , and notif ied the government in 
advance of a planned strike, the government permitted strike s and did not use force 
on strikers.   Due to strike requirements, however,  many  strikes were ruled illegal, 
and striking workers often risked  dismissal .  The law prohibits sympathy strikes.   
Compulsory arbitration was rare and only applied in cases involving a group 
dispute of workers in essential services.  The law prohibits an employer from 
hiring workers to replace striking or locked -out workers and prohibits workers 
from picketing only if the parties have an agreement on the provision of minimum 
services or, if no such agreement has been made, within 14 days of the 
commencement of the strike.  
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor  
The constitution and law prohibit and criminalize all forms of forced and 
compulsory labor, including of children, with an exception for compulsory labor as 
part of a prison sentence for civil and political offenses.  
The law allows  compulsory prison labor in the case of  a willful breach of a  
Page 23
contract of employment by an employee who is acting either alone or in 
combination with others if such breach affects the operation of essential services.   
Sentences of imprisonment involving compulsory prison labor may be imposed on 
any person who prints, makes, imports, publishes, sells, distributes, or reproduces 
any publication prohibited by the president “in his absolute discretion” as being 
“contrary to the public interest.”  Similar sentences may be imposed concerning 
seditious publications and on any person who manages, or is a member of, or in 
any way takes part in the activity of an unlawful society, particularly of a society 
declared unlawful as being “dangerous to peace and order. ”  The provisions are 
worded in terms broad enough to allow punishment for the expression of views, and in sofar as they are enforceable with sanctions involving compulsory labor, 
they are incompatible with international standards.   A prisoner ma y be employed 
outside a prison under the immediate order and for the benefit of a person other 
than a public authority.  
Apart from th e prison exception, labor inspectors  from the Ministry of Labour and 
Home Affairs referred  cases of forced labor to the BPS  for prosecution.  The 
government did not effectively enforce the law, particularly in remote areas, and 
compulsory and forced labor occurred in several sectors.  
There were no prosecutions for forced labor during the year.  Members of the San 
community, in cluding children, were sometimes subjected to forced labor 
conditions on farms and ranches in the Ghanzi District.  The law prescribed 
penalties that were not commensurate with comparable serious crimes.  
Also see the Department of State ’s Trafficking in Pe rsons Report  at 
https://www.state.gov/trafficking- in-persons- report/ . 
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for Employment  
See the Department of Labor ’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at 
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings /. 
d. Discrimination with Respect to Employment and Occupation 
Labor laws prohibit discrimination based on race, color, tribe, place of origin, 
including national origin, social origin,  sex, disability, language, sexual orientation 
Page 24
or gender identity , HIV  status, marital status, religion, creed,  or social status.  The 
law does not address discrimination based on age.  Penalties were less than 
penalties related to other civil rights.   The government generally enforced these 
regulations in the public and formal sectors.  Penalties were regularly applied 
against violators.  
There was not a pattern of discrimination in employment or barriers to 
employment.  According to the World Economic Forum, women earn ed 32 percent 
less than men employed in equal  work. 
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work  
Wage and Hour  Laws :  The law provides for minimum hourly wages for full time 
work  by sector, with these minimum wages set by the Ministry of  Labour and 
Home Affairs .  The minimum wage for all sectors was higher than the official 
estimate of the poverty income level.  Formal -sector jobs generally paid well above 
minimum wage.  
In January, the government revised the minimum wage increasing it slightly from 
6.70 pula ($0.52) per hour to 7.22 pul a ($0.56) p er hour.  For the domestic as well 
as the agriculture sector, the minimum wage has been increased from $76 per 
month to $83 per month.  The law permits a maximum 48 -hour workweek, 
exclusive of overtime, which is payable at one-and-a-half  times the base hourly 
rate. 
In May 2021, the government froze payment for overtime  work of  public servants 
as a measure to address a budget shortfall during the COVID- 19 pandemic.  
According to union representatives, some workers were required to perform 
overtime duties wit hout compensation.   Alleged violations of wage, hour, or 
overtime laws were common in the automotive manufacturing sector.  
Occupational Safety and Health:   There were limited occupational safety and 
health (OSH)  requirements .  The government ’s ability to enforce OSH legislation 
remained limited due to inadequate staffing and lack of cle ar minist erial 
jurisdictions. 
The law provides protection against termination for workers who  verbally 
Page 25
complain regarding  hazardous conditions , but no specific provisions in the law 
allow workers to remove themselves from situations that endanger their health or 
safety without jeopardizing their employment.   There were no figures available on 
the number of industrial accidents during the year that caused the death or serious 
injury of workers.  
Wage, Hour , and OSH Enforcement:   The Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs 
is responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH standards, but did not effectively 
enforce the law.   Penalties for violations were  commensurate with those for similar 
crimes, such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were regularly applied against 
violators.   The number of inspectors was not sufficient to e nforce compliance.   
Inspectors did have authority to conduct unannounced inspecti ons and could 
demand that an employer suspend the use of hazardous materials or equipment.  
Inspectors could not initiate sanctions on their own but could require employers to 
meet in a public office to discuss matters.  
Informal Sector:   The 2020 National Informal Sector Recovery Plan  estimated 
that the count ry had approximately 190,000  informal workers who contribute d 
approximately  5.3 percent of all economic activity.  Informal work sectors 
include d wholesale and retail trade (45 percent), manufacturing (15 percent) , and 
construction  of buildings (12 percent).   A higher percentage of  women and young 
persons work ed in the  informal sector.  Some workers  in the informal sector 
receive d only housing and food, particularly in the agricultural and domestic 
service areas.  Wages  in the informal sector were frequently below the minimum 
wage.  Informal- sector workers  and part time workers generally were covered by 
wage, hour, OSH, and other labor laws  available to formal -sector workers, but 
enforcement in the informal sector was rare .  The Department of Social and 
Community Development  provides social protection for informal economy 
workers.  
Foreign migrant workers were vulnerable to exploitative w orking conditions , such 
as working excessive hours or having their wages withheld, mainly in domestic 
labor.  
Page 26
