Page 1:
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2022  
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor  ANGOLA 2022 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Angola is a constitutional republic .  In August the ruling Popular Movement for 
the Liberation of Angola party won presidential and legislative elections with 5 1 
percent of the vote.  The ruling party ’s presidential candidate , João Lourenço, took 
the oath of office  for a five-year term in September , and the party  retained a 
majority in the National Assembly.   Domestic and international observers reported 
polling throughout the country was peaceful and generally credible .  Observers , 
however,  criticized the lack of an independent National Electoral Commission and 
the lack of transparency in the electoral process , noting  that the ruling party 
benefited from biased media  coverage and access . 
The national police, controlled by the Ministry of Interior, are responsible f or 
internal security and law enforcement.  The Criminal Investigation Services, also 
under the Ministry of Interior, are responsible for preventing and investigating 
domestic crimes.  The Expatriate and Migration Services and the Border Guard Police  within  the Ministry of Interior are responsible for law enforcement relating 
to migration.  The state intelligence and security service reports directly to the 
presidency and investigates state security matters.  The Angolan Armed Forces also have domestic secur ity responsibilities, including border security, expulsion of 
irregular migrants, and small-scale actions against separatist groups , such as in 
Cabinda , the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda.  Civilian 
authorities maintained effective cont rol over the  security forces.  There were 
reports that m embers of the security forces committed some abuses.  
Significant  human rights issues included credible  reports of :  unlawful or arbitrary 
killings , including e xtrajudicial killings ; cases of cruel, inhuman, or degrading 
treatment or punishment by government security forces; harsh and life -threatening 
prison conditions; arbitrary detention ; political prisoners or detainees; serious 
restrictions on free expression and the press, includi ng violence, threats of violence 
or unjustified arrests against journalists, censorship,  and enforcement or threat to 
enforce  criminal libel laws ; interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly; 
serious government  corruption ; lack of investigation of a nd accountability for 
Page 2:
gender -based violence; and crimes involving violence or threats of violence 
targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer , and intersex  persons.  
The government took significant steps to identify, investigate, prosecute , and 
punish officials who committed abuses as well as those who were involved in 
corruption.   Nevertheless, accountability for human rights abuses was limited due 
to a lack of checks and balances, lack of institutional capa city, a culture of 
impunity, and  government corruption.  
Section 1 . Respect for the Integrity of the Person  
a.Arbit rary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or Politically
Motivated  Killings
There were reports that the  government or its agents committed arbitrary or 
unlawful killings and sometimes used excessive force in maintaining stability.  The 
national police and Angolan Armed Forces have internal mechanisms to 
investigate whether security force killings were justifiable and pursue prosecutions.  
On May 26, several unidentified members of a security force comp osed of 
members of the National Police , Cambambe Municipal Command, Angolan 
Armed Forces, and China Gezhouba Group Company security fired on unarmed 
striking workers at the Caculo Cabaça Dam project in Cuanza Norte Province, 
killing three workers and injuring eight additional workers.  Video circulating on social media showed  a line of unidentified security personnel on a road 
approximately 150 yards away from a group of workers, standing in the road, unarmed, with their hands raised.  Shots c ould be heard in the audio and at least 
one of the workers appeared  to be hit by the gunfire.  The Cuanza Norte Provincial 
Command of the National Police issued a press state ment confirming the deaths 
and injuries, saying “the forces responsible for maintaining local order ” responded 
to workers vandalizing property at the construction site in protest of poor labor conditions at the project run by the Chinese compa ny. 
b.Dis appearance
There were  no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government authorities. 
Page 2
Page 3:
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment , and Other Related Abuses  
The constitution and law prohibit all forms of torture and cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment or punishment, but the government did not always enforce these prohibitions. 
Periodic r eports continued of beatings and other abuses both on the way to and 
inside  police stations during interrogations.  The government acknowledged that at 
times members of the security forces used excessive force when apprehending 
individuals.  P olice authorities  openly condemned some acts of violence or 
excessive force against individuals and asked that victims report abuses to the national police or the Office of the Public Defender . 
In March, 10 social activists were arrested while giving  a lecture on local 
sustainable d evelopment at Agostinho Neto Primary School in Malanje .  The group 
told reporters that they were taken to a police station and beaten for three hours by 
agents of the Criminal Investigation Services. 
On August 27- 28, several activists were reportedly  beaten  with clubs and rifle butts 
during their arrest and later at the police station by mem bers of the  Rapid 
Intervention force of the National Police in Lobito, Benguela Province.  Among 
those arrested, a journalist for the nongovernmental organization ( NGO ) 
OMUNGA , Avisto Mbota , claimed he was hand cuffed  and beaten unconscious, 
and later at the police station was held down and beat en again , and told to hold a 
grenade  with his mouth, a request  which he refused.  
Prison and Detention  Center Conditions  
Prison and detention center conditions were harsh and life  threatening  due to 
overcrowding, a lack of medical care, corruption, and violence . 
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prisons ha d a total capacity for 21,000 inmates but 
held approximately  25,000  inmates, with approximately 10,000  of those inmates in 
pretrial detention.   Authorities frequently held pretrial detainees with sentenced 
inmates .  Authorities also held short-term detainees with those serving long-term 
sentences for violent crimes, especially in provincial prisons.   Inmates who were 
Page 3
Page 4:
unable to pay court-ordered fi nes remained in prison after completing their 
sentence  or while  awaiting release warrants issued by higher courts.  Some 
offenders, including violent offenders, reported paying fines and bribes to secure 
their freedom, but it was unclear how prevalent this practice was.  
Prison conditions varied widely between urban and rural areas.  Prisons in rural 
areas  were  less crowded and had better rehabilitation, training, and reintegration 
services.  There were no reports of deaths in prisons, but there were reports  of 
inmates becoming sick due to the poor conditions of the prisons, including with 
COVID -19.  Local NGOs stated prisons did not always provide adequate prison 
services, such as medical care, sanitation, potable water, or food, and it was 
customary for families to bring food to prisoners. 
On June 13, Ombudsperson Florbela Araújo visited Viana jail, in Luanda Province , 
and said the facility was overcrowded and had excess cases of persons in  pretrial 
detention .  The facility ha d a capacity for 2,384, although the re were 3,248 
inmates , of whom 2,609 were in pr etrial detention.   She also expressed concern 
regarding the poor health condition of some inmates and noticed the laboratory for 
clinic al analysis was not operat ional. 
Administration :  The government investigated and monitored prison and 
detention center conditions . 
Independent Monitoring :  The government permitted visits to prisons by 
independent local observers.  Ne vertheless , civil society organizations faced 
difficulties in contacting detainees, and prison authorities undermined civil society 
work by impeding their ability to enter the prisons.  
In December 2021, members of the Provincial H uman Rights Committee  of Bié  
visited three jails.  The committee ’s representative , Aldino Salumbo , said prisons 
were overcrowded  and there were several cases of pretrial dete ntion . 
In February t he ombudsperson visited the jail in Caboxa , Bengo  Province . 
Improvements:   During the year three additional videoconference rooms were 
added to detention facilities.  These were  used for virtual meetings between 
inmates and relatives or lawyers.  
Page 4
Page 5:
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention 
The law prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention and provides for the right of any 
person to challenge the lawfulness of his or her arrest or detention in court.  The 
governm ent did not always observe these requirements. 
According to several NGO and civil society sources, police arbitrarily arrested 
individuals without due process and routinely detained persons who participated, 
or were about to participate, in antigovernment protests, although the constitution 
protects th e right to protest .  While t hey often released detainees after a few hours, 
police at times charged them  with crimes . 
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees  
The law requires a magistrate or judge to issue a warrant before an  arrest may be 
made, although a person caught com mitting an offense may be arrested 
immediately without a warrant .  Authorities , however, did not always procure 
warrants before  making an  arrest.  
By law prosecutor s must inform detainee s of the legal basis for their  detention 
within 48 hours.  NGO sources reported authorities often did not respect the law.  If prosecutor s are unable to determine whether there is a legal basis for the 
detention within 48 hours, prosecutors have the authori ty to release the person 
from detention.   Depending on the seriousness of the case, prosecutors may  require 
the detained person to submit to one or more pretrial procedures prescribed by law, 
such as posting bail, periodic appearance before authorities, or  house arrest.  
If prosecutor s determine a legal basis exists for the detention, a detained person 
may be held in pretrial detention for up to four months without charge and up to 12 
months before a judge is required to rule on the matter .  Cases of special 
complexity regarding crimes for which conviction is punishable by eight or more 
years  allow for pretrial detention without charge for up to six  months , and up to 14 
months before a judge is required to rule on the case .  By law th e period of pretrial 
detention counts as time served in fulfillment of  a sentence of imprisonment. 
The law states that all detainees have the right to a lawyer, either chosen by them 
or appointed by the government on a pro bono basis .  The lack of lawyers in 
Page 5
Page 6:
certain provinces at times impeded the right to a lawyer .  There was an insufficient 
number to handle the volume of criminal cases, and the geographic distribution of 
lawyers was a problem , since  most lawyers were concentrated in Luanda .  Lawyers 
and NGOs noted that even in Luanda , most indigent defendants did not have 
access to lawyers during the ir first appearance before a judicial authority or during 
their trial.  When a lawyer i s unavailable, a judge may appoint a  clerk of the court 
to represent the defendant, but clerks of the court often lacked the necessary 
training to provide an adequate defense .  In June r esearch  was published on 
detained women in six provinces that was conducted in 2020 by the Justice, Peace 
and Democracy Association.  It showed only 34 percent of women had access to a 
lawyer on the first appearance  before  a public prosecutor.  
A functioning but ineffective bail  system, widely used for minor crimes, existed.  
Prisoners and their families reported that prison officials demanded bribes to 
release prisoners.  
The law allows family members prompt access to detainees, but prison officials 
occasionally ignored this right or made it conditional upon payment of a bribe .  
The law allows  detainees to be held incommunicado for up to 48 hours until being 
presented to a public prosecutor, except they may  communicate with their lawyer 
or a family member.  There were  instance s in which lawyer s were not allowed to 
communicate with detainee s during the 48 -hour period.  
Arbitrary Arrest :  During the year there were instances in which security forces 
reacted violently to public demonstrations against the government and detained 
protest ers.  The visible presence of security forces was often enough to deter 
significantly what the government deemed unlawful demonstrations.   In certain 
cases, members of groups organizing protest s were arrested at their homes prior to 
the protest.  
On March 19, following a clash between two opposing political parties in Sanza 
Pombo, Uige Province, 26 persons, all members of the main opposition party, were 
arrested and held for four months without trial before being released for lack of evidence of their participation.  
On September  13-14, two political activist s were arrested without a warrant by 
Page 6
Page 7:
unidentified armed police at their home s in Luanda Province  and held  until 
September 19  without communication with their lawyer for alleged charges  of 
defamation of the p resident on social media,  which were later dismissed.  
Pretrial Detention :  Excessively long pretrial detention continued to be a serious 
problem .  An inadequate number of ju dges and poor communication among 
authorities contributed to the problem .  Many prisoners were held in pretrial 
detention longer than permitted under law, which ranges from four to 14 months 
depending on the severity and complexity of the alleged crime.  In some cases, authorities held inmates in prison for up to five years in pretrial detention.   The 
length of pretrial detention at times equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence for the alleged crime.   The government often did not release detainees confined 
beyond the legal time limit, claiming previous releases of pretrial detainees had resulted in an increase in crime . 
In her visits to prisons, Ombudsperson  Araújo noted cases of delays o f release 
warrants in Caboxa jail, Bengo Province, and cases of excessive pretrial detention 
in Viana jail, Luanda Province.  
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial 
The constitution and law provide for an independent and impartial judiciary, and  
the government gener ally respected judicial independence and impartiality.  The 
judicial system was affected by institutional weaknesses , including political 
influence in the decision-making process . 
There were long trial delays at the Supreme Court, in part because it remained  the 
only appe llate court in the country  at the beginning of the year .  A 2015 law  
established another level of appellate courts to reduce delays.   During the year, 
three of these courts were inaugurated in Luanda, Benguela , and Lubango, 
recruited judges , and personnel began operating.   Criminal courts also had a large 
backlog of cases that resulted in major delays in hearings.  In March c ourt cases 
were also delayed by striking Supreme Court clerks, which effectively shut down 
the courts for several weeks.  
The national police and the Angolan Armed Forces have internal court systems 
that generally remained closed to outside scrutiny.  Although members of these 
Page 7
Page 8:
organizations may be tried under their in ternal regulations, cases that include 
violations of criminal or civil laws may  also fall under the jurisdiction of provincial 
courts .  Both the Attorney General’ s Office  and the Ministry of Justice and Human 
Rights have civilian oversight responsibilities over military courts.  
Trial Procedures  
The constitution and law provide for the right to a fair and public trial, and the 
judiciary generally enforce d this right.  
At times, a uthorities did not  inform d efendants of the charges levied against them  
in detail within 48 hours  of their detention  as required by law.  According to the 
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, all public defenders are licensed lawyers, 
but at times, especially in rural locations,  defendants were represented by clerks of 
the court due to lack of availability of lawyers.  D efense lawyers did not always 
have access to prosecution files and evidence in a timely manner to prepare a 
defense .  Defense lawyers were not always given adequate facilities to prepare case 
work.  
A separate juvenile court hears cases of children  between the ages of 12 and 16 
accused of committing a criminal offense .  Children  older than  16 accused of 
committing a criminal offense are tried in regular courts.  In many rural 
municipalities, there is no provision for juvenile courts, so offenders as young as 
12 may be tried as adults. 
Political Prisoners and Detainees 
There were reports of political prisoners.  
On January 12, activist Luther Campos “King ” was detained at his home in Luanda 
without a warrant following a protest that had turned violent two days before.  
King was charged with inciting vandalism, rebellion, insult  against the president, 
association with wrongdoers, and of criminal participation in the destruction of a 
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) local office.  His trial 
began on December 9.  Several witnesses were heard by the court,  but as of year ’s 
end no verdict had been reached. 
Page 8
Page 9:
On February 25, more  than a year after his arrest, Jos e Mateus  Zecamutchim a, 
leader of the Lunda Tchokwe Protectorate Movement , was sentenced to four years 
and six months in prison  on charges of instigating collective disobedience  that led 
to a deadly January 2021 clash betwe en protesters and police  in Cafunfo, Lunda 
Norte Province .  He was held for seven months before being formally indicted.   
Media sources  viewed  his detention and conviction as politically motivated , stating 
that he was in a different province at the time of the clash, while the government 
claimed  his separatist speeches had led to the gathering and resulting violent clash. 
Civil Judicial Procedures and Remedies  
Damages for human rights abuses  may be sought in provincial courts, appeals  
courts , and the Supreme Court .  The law allows victims of human ri ghts abuse s to 
seek compensation from the state.  The rules provide that the state must 
compensate victims who are illegally detained or arrested, are under exce ssively 
long pretrial detention, are not released in due time against a legal provision or a 
court decision or are victim s of a gross judicial error.  Public  agents responsible for 
actions that abuse  human rights should in turn compensate the state.   During the 
year, t here were no known cases where the state compensated victims.  
Property Seizure and Restitution  
The government evicted persons from their places of residence or seized their property without due process or adequate restitution.   On April 9,  hundreds of 
families residing on land adjacent to the newly constructed airport on the outskirts 
of the capital city Luanda were evicted and their homes demolished with no 
warning.  Victims claimed government workers supported by the N ational Pol ice 
arriv ed at 4 a.m. and  began demolishing homes, claiming they were on 
government-reserved land.   Documenting land ownership often takes  years to 
complete, resulting in many residents not having a clear title to the land or home 
they have lived in for many years.  
f. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, 
or Correspondence 
The constitution and law prohibit the arbitrary or unlawful interference of privacy, 
Page 9
Page 10:
family, home, or co rrespondence,  but the government did not always respect these 
prohibitions .  Civil organizations and politically active individuals, including 
government critics, members of opposition parties, and journalists, complained that 
the government monitored their activities and membership on social media and 
allegedly us ed spyware  to monitor their whereabouts and tele phone conversations .  
These groups also frequently complained of threats and harassment based on their 
affiliations with  groups that were  purportedly or explicitly  antigovernment . 
Section 2 . Respect for Civil Liberties  
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the Press and 
Other Media  
The constitution and law provide for freedom of expression, including for 
members of the press  and other media , but the government did not always  respect 
this right. 
Freedom of Expression :  Individuals were increasingly able to use private media 
and social media platforms to openly criticize government policies and practices.  
Individuals reported practicing self -censorship but generally were able to criticize 
government policies without fear of direct reprisal.  Social media  was widely used 
in the large r cities  and provided an open forum for discussion.  There were 
instances where  civil society members were not able to assemble an d express their 
opinions in public.  
On January 14, activist Tanaice Neutro was arrested in front of the prison -hospital 
São Paulo in Luanda for streaming a live video protesting “ King’s” arrest and 
highlighting the poor prison conditions  for King (see section 1.e., Political 
Prisoners and Detainees) .  On October 12, Neutro was convicted on charge s of 
insulting the s tate and its symbols and given a 15 -month suspended sentence . 
Violence and Harassment :  Repor ting on corruption, poor governance , and 
human rights abuses were the primary reasons for attacks against journalists, which 
occurred with impunity.  Journalists reported more incidents of violence , 
harassment, and intimidation compared with the previous year .  Other journalists 
reported harassment by authorities while covering peaceful demonstrations and 
Page 10
Page 11:
election rallies.  
Journalists covering land topics  were targeted during the year.  On April 13, police  
surrounded reporters who were covering evictions and home demolitions in 
Luanda , taking their equipment and allegedly shoving and hitting the m with a 
baton.  
On August 17, V oice of America reporter Coque Mukuta was detained by the 
National Police  while covering a peaceful public demonstration in Luanda.  His 
cell phone and professional credential s were confiscated,  and he was driven around 
in a police vehicle for three hours before being released.  
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other 
Media, Includi ng Online Media :  Private television media outlets seized by the 
state in 2020 due to corruption investigations remained under government control, 
with no announced plan for privatization.  In September, one of the seized stations 
– TV Palanca – was shut down and all staff and equipment transferred to state -run 
Public Television of Angola.   Three independent stations  told to cease 
broadcasting in 2021 remained off the air.  The president appoints the leadership of 
all major state -owned media outlets, and state control of these outlets often led to 
one-sided reporting.  State news outlets, including Angolan Public Television, 
Radio Nacional, and the Jornal de Angola  newspaper,  strongly favored the ruling 
party and often did not cover social problems reflecting poor governance or voices 
critical of the government.  During the campaign period ahead of the August 24 
election, opposition parties received significantly less coverage  on state media than 
the ruling MPLA party, and it was often difficult to distinguish between 
communications of the government and those of the ruling party.   Journalist s 
working for government -controlled outlets reported threats of job losses if they did 
not comply with the editorial narrative of the MPLA party.  
In May the Ministry of Telecommunications, Information Technolog y, and Social 
Communication asked 15  internet -based media outlets to show proof of licensed 
activity.  Several journalists considered the move a way to control and intimidate 
those outlets.  
The Regulatory Entity for Social Communication (ERCA) is a body composed of 
Page 11
Page 12:
11 counselors designated by political parties represented in the parliament , the 
government, and journalists .  ERCA ’s respo nsibility is to safeguard press freedom 
and lawful media activity and to  issue  regulations and decisions on those matters .  
Journalists and opposition political parties criticized ERCA for being controlled by 
the ruling MPLA and for issuing regulations that favor ed the government.  
The Ethics and Credentialing Commission is a body exclusively comp osed of  
journalists that is authorized to license and delicense journalists.  In July the 
Ministry of Telecommunications, Information Technology, and Social 
Communication opened an office to support commission operations.  As of 
October 2021 , any media outlets allowing a journalist to work without credential s 
faced a fine of approximately 23,10 0 kwanza ( $52), which was approximately  a 
journalist’ s monthly salary.  Journalists reported practic ing self-censorship for 
political and financial reasons. 
The minister of social communication, the spokesperson of the preside ncy, and the 
national director of information maintained significant decision- making authority 
over media .  It was commonly understood these individuals actively vetted news 
stories in the state -controlled print, television, and radio media and exercised 
considerable authority over some privately owned outlets.   State -controlled media 
rarely published or broadcast stories critical of the ruling party, government 
officials, or government policies. 
Several journalists, members of civil society, and opposition  party members 
express ed concerns before the electoral campaign began on July 24 that the public 
media was dedicating most of its news space to the MPLA, resulting in a lack of 
balanced coverage of the different candidates.  
Libel/Slander  Laws :  Defamation is a crime  punishable by imprisonment or a 
fine.  Unlike cases in which defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty, 
defendants  in defamation cases have the burden of proving their innocence by 
providing evidence of the validity of the  allegedly damaging material.  
Several journalists in print media, radio, and political blogs faced  libel and 
defamation lawsuits.  Journalists complained the government used libel laws to 
limit their ability to report on corruption and nepotistic practices, while the 
Page 12
Page 13:
government stated that some journalists abuse d their position s and publish ed 
inaccurate stories regarding  government officials without verifying the facts or 
providing the accused with  the right of  reply .  The NGO Committee to Protect 
Journalists cited criminal defamation and insult investigations underway into 
journalists Escrivão José and Óscar Constantino in response to their investigative 
reporting on politicians and public figures.  In June, José was questioned by police 
and named as a formal suspect on defamation charges stemming from his reporting 
of corruption allegations in a land deal by a public official.  In July, Constantino, a reporter for Radio Ecclésia, was acquitted of defamation charges stemming from a 
2020 news article regarding a public official ’s resignation amid an alleged sex 
scandal.  
Internet Freedom  
The government did not  restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor online 
content .  There were no credible reports that the government monitored private 
online communications without appropriate legal oversight . 
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association  
The constitution and law provide for the right of peaceful assembly and 
association, but the government did not always respect th ese right s. 
Freedom of Pea ceful Assembly  
The law requires written notification to the local administrator and police three 
days before public assemblies are to be held.  The law does not require government 
permission to hold public assemblies, but it permits authorities to restrict or stop 
assemblies in public spaces within 109 yards of public, military, detention, 
diplomatic , or consular buildings for security reasons.  The law also require s public 
assembl ies to start after 7 p.m.  on weekdays and 1 p. m. on Saturdays.  
On May 21, in Cabinda P rovince, National Police encircled a building , preventing 
the NGOs OMUNGA and Associação para Desenvolvimento da Cultura e Direitos 
Humanos from holding a conference discussing pathways to peace in the region.  
The M inistry of Interior endorsed the decision arguing that despite being registered 
nationally, OMUNGA was not based in Cabinda and required additional 
Page 13
Page 14:
authorization from the provincial government to hold meetings.  
The government permitted demonstrations , including ant igovernment protests, but 
at times prohibited events based on perceived or claimed security considerations.  
Police and administrators did not interfere with progovernment gatherings.  
Politically u naffiliated groups intending to criticize the government or government 
leaders  often encountered the presence of police who prevented them from holding 
their event  or limited their march route .  In such cases, authorities claimed the 
timing or venue requested was problematic, that proper authorities had not been 
notified, or that those protests put social stabilit y and security at risk . 
Freedom of Association  
Extensive delays in the NGO registration process continued to be a problem .  
NGOs  that had not yet received registration were allowed to operate.   At times t he 
government arbitrarily restricted the activities of associations it considered 
subversive by refusing to grant permits for projects and other activities.   
Authorities generally permitted opposition parties to organize and hold meetings.  
c. Freedom of Religion 
See the Department of State ’s International Religious Freedom Report  at 
https: //www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/ . 
d. Freedom of Movement  and the Right to Leave the Country  
The constitution and law provide for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation.  T he government at times restricted these  related 
rights . 
In-country Movement :  Document checkpoints in domestic airports and on roads 
throughout the country were  common.  Reports by local NGOs  suggest ed that, 
despite  an incremental drop in cases,  some police officers continued to  extor t 
money from civilians at checkpoints and  during  regular traffic stops.  Reports from 
the diamond-mining provinces of Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul stated  some 
government agents restricted the movement s of local communities. 
Page 14
Page 15:
e. Protection of Refugees  
The government generally cooperated with the Office of the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in 
providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees,  and asylum 
seekers, as well  as other persons of concern.  
Access to Asylum:   The law provides for the granting of asylum or refugee status, 
but the government did not fully implement the law.  The law provides specific 
procedures for the submission of an asylum application and guidance on the determination of re fugee status.  UNHCR and several NGOs, however, reported 
that asylum seekers did not have a mechanism to apply for or resolve their status.  A 2015 law changed the role of the Committee for the Recognition of the Right to Asylum, the prior implementing mec hanism to identify, verify, and legalize asylum 
seekers, to that of an advisory board.  The government had not put into practice a 
mechanism to adjudicate asylum cases in the committee ’s place.  The law also 
authorized the creation of reception centers for  refugees and asylum seekers where 
they were to receive assistance until the government decides on their cases, but the 
government had not yet established these centers.  
Abuse of Migrants and Refugees :  There were reports throughout the year that 
Lunda Norte provincial authorities exerted pressure on irregular migrants to return 
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) .  Under the l aw, authorities 
should issue refugee cards with a five-year validity.   According to UNHCR , the 
government ha d not issued or renewed refugee cards  since 2015,  and no refugee 
possessed an unexpired, government- issued refugee card  during the year .  The 
minister of interior told UN officials that the government would begin to fully 
implement the law when COVID- 19 restrictions were lifted, but despite the lifting 
of restrictions during the year, no refugee cards were  renewed .  Refugees reported 
a general lack of acceptance of the refugee card and lack of knowledge concerning 
the rights it was intended to safeguard.  
Freedom of Movement :  UNHCR, NGOs, and refugees reported restrictions on 
freedom of movement in Lunda Norte Province .  Refugees also reported periodic 
restrictions on freedom of movement from their resettlement site in Lovua, Lunda 
Norte Province , and cited such restrictions as a factor motivating them to return to 
Page 15
Page 16:
the DRC . 
Employment :  There were reports that the government imposed restrictions on 
refugees’ ability to work.   The law does not allow refugees to work and restricted 
refugees from obtaining business licenses.  A regulation  restrict s refugees from 
obtaining the business license required to own and operate a business.  Refugees 
often  faced difficulty obtaining employment due to the ir inability to obtain legal 
documents required to work in the formal sector .  Authorities continued to ha rass 
asylum seekers and refugees working in the informal economy . 
Access to Basic Services:  Persons with recognized refugee status could at times 
obtain public services.  The government ha d not implemented key elements of the 
2015 asylum law allowing  refugee and asylum seekers’ access to basic services.  
UNHCR, NGOs, and refugees , reported that urban refugees faced difficulty  
access ing public services such as health care and education.  E xpired 
documentation prevented refugees from owning land or vehicles in their name , 
purchasing cellular SIM cards , obtaining business licenses , obtaining birth 
certificates for children born in country, and accessing education beyond primary school.  
Durable Solutions:  In July the government cooperated with
 UNHCR  and 
supported an organized voluntary repatriation of  88 Congolese refugees from 
Lunda Norte Province to the DRC.   This wa s the first repatriation since they were 
halted in 2020 due to COVID-19.   The government through the Migration and 
Foreigners Service an d the Ministry of Social Action, Family, and Women ’s 
Promotion ( Ministry of Social Assistance ) participated in the screening phase to 
ensure that those to be repatriated were refugees , processed  the related repatriation 
documentation , facilitated family reunification for the purpose of returning , 
verified that those returning were on the Vol untary Repatriation  manifest, and 
signed the manifest at the borders for handover to counterparts on the DRC side . 
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons  
In 2021 , due to a severe, prolonged drought in the southern provinces, 
approximately 15,000 internally displaced persons congregated around feeding centers in Cunene, Huila, and Namibe Provinces.  NGOs report ed that the majority  
Page 16
Page 17:
of these persons returned to their places of origin as result of international 
humanitarian assistance; government action to lower prices of basic food items, 
and the Kwenda social assistance program.  
g. Stateless Persons  
The government estimate d there were more than 12 million unregistered citizens in 
the country.  Children of undocumented foreign parents born in the country were at 
risk of statelessness due to their parents ’ inability  to register their births.  In June , 
the government announced it had registered six million pe rsons under  a major  birth 
registration program it began in 2019 . 
Section 3 . Freedom to Participate in the Political Process  
The constitution and law provide citizens the ability to choose their government in 
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and 
equal suffrage . 
Elections and Political Participation 
Recent Elections :  On August 24, the government held presidential and legislative 
elections, in which the ruling MPLA won its fifth consecutive election with 51 
percent of the vote , re-electing  João Lourenço to a second term as the country ’s 
third president since independence .  The MPLA lost its supermajority in the 
National Assembly but retained a majority with 124 of the 220 seats.  The National 
Union for the Total Independence of Angola ( UNITA ), the l argest opposition 
party, won an unprecedented 90 seats,  up from 51 in the 2017 election, and for the 
first time won the overall vote count in Cabinda, Zaire , and Luanda P rovinces.   For 
the first time, voting abroad at select embassies took place with plans to expand the practice  in future elections.  
New voter  registration procedures  were widely publicized in urban areas and 
resulted in more than 14 million registered voters, up from 9.3 million in 2017.  
Despite registering five  million more voters than in 2017, overall voter turnout fell 
by more than a half -million voters in the August 24 election, resulting in a voter 
turnout of only 44.8 percent of the registered electorate of 14.4 million voters.  This was significantly lower than in previous elections:  76 percent (2017), 72 
Page 17
Page 18:
percent (2012), and 81 percent (2008).  Opposition parties criticized the slow 
rollout of registra tion centers in rural areas , changing locations of polling stations, 
and the presence of deceased voters remaining on the rolls.  Domestic and 
international observers reported polling throughout the country was peaceful, 
orderly , and generally well organized.  Observation missions criticized the lack of 
political independence of the National Electoral Commission ( CNE ) and its failure 
to publish voter rolls 30 days prior to election day.   Observers  also noted that 
media access and coverage , as well as institutional advantages, heavily favored the 
ruling party and did not foster equal participation.   Opposition parties complained 
to the C onstitutional Court regarding aspects of the electoral process, including the 
CNE ’s lack of transparent decision  making on key election procedures and 
perceived irregularities during the provincial- level vote count. 
Political Parties and Political Participation :  The ruling MPLA party dominated 
all political institutions , giving its members advantage s in obtaining civil service 
and government leadership jobs .  For the August 24 elections, the CNE reduced the 
number of election observers from 3,000 in 2017 to 2,000, which several observation missions noted was too few to cover the 13, 212 polling stations.  The 
CNE continued the practice of limiting observers to a single province.   Domestic 
observer NGOs were limited to no more than three  observers per province, and 
some NGOs complained they did not receive credentials despite applying early.  
Political parties must be represented in all 18 provinces, but only the MPLA, UNITA, and Broad Convergence for the Salvation of Angola Electoral Coalition , 
to a lesser extent, had truly national constituencies .  By law no political party may 
limit party membership based on ethnicity, race, or gender.  
Participation of Women and Members of Minorit y Groups :  No laws limit the 
participation of women or members of minorit y groups in the political proce ss, and 
some did participate . 
Section 4 . Corruption and Lack of Transparency in 
Government 
The law provides criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the government 
generally implemented the law effectively.  The government dismissed and 
Page 18
Page 19:
prosecuted midlevel officials for petty corruption.   There were reports of 
government corruption during the year.   The Attorney General’ s Office  continued 
corruption investigations and brought criminal charges against several m idlevel 
officials.  In October, President Louren ço highlighted that during his first term, 
more than 3,600 declarations of public office holders’ assets were turned in to the 
attorney general versus 188 during the five years before he was elected.   
Nonethe less, official i mpunity  and the uniform application of anticorruption 
legislation  remained a serious problem . 
Corruption :  In November  the trial of Major Pedro Lussaty and 48 other 
defendants that began  in July co ncluded with defend ants receiving sentences 
ranging from two to 14 years’ imprisonment on charges including embezzlement, 
fraud, and abuse of authority.   Lussaty , detained since 2021 , admitted to possession 
of more than $ 62 million  dollars  diverted from state funds.  The tria l, according to 
local analysts, partially revealed the contradictions, mismatched speeds, 
incompetence, and injustices of the judicial system  concerning  the fight against 
corruption.  
In March a court sentenced Carlos de S ão Vicente, former head of the state -owned 
insurance company AAA Seguros, who was arrested in 2020, to nine years in 
prison and fined him  $500 million  dollars for embezzlement, money laundering, 
and fraud.  
Section 5 . Governmental Posture Toward s Internation al and 
Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human 
Rights 
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups operated throughout the country, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights.  Some 
groups  investigating gove rnment corruption and human rights abuses alleged 
government interference in their activities, particularly in provinces outside of 
Luanda .  Civil society organizations and opposition political parties faced 
difficulties in contacting detainees and doing work in the prisons, despite  COVID-
19 preventive measures being relaxed during the year . 
The law requires NGOs to specify their mandate and areas of activity.  The 
Page 19
Page 20:
government used this provision to prevent or discourage established NGOs from 
engaging in certain activities, especially those that the government deemed 
politically sensitive .  (See also section 2.b.). 
The government allowed local NGOs to carry out human rights-related work, but 
many NGOs reported they were forced to limit the scope of their work because they faced problems registering, were subjected  to subtle forms of intimidation, 
and risked more serious forms of harassment and closure.   In May the NGO  
OMUNGA was prevented by local police in Cabinda Province from holding a 
conference discussing peace in the region, on grounds that they were not a locally 
registered organization , despite being registered nationally for several years. 
Government Human Righ ts Bodies :  The state-funded Inter ministerial 
Commission for the Writing of Human Rights Reports include d representatives 
from various government ministries .  Leading civil society members decided not to 
participate on the commission because they did not believe the commission was 
independent or effective.  
The 10 th Commission on Human Rights of the National Assembly is charged with 
investigating citizen complaints of alleged human rights abuse s and makes 
recommendations to the National Assembly. 
An Office of the Ombudsman, with national jurisdiction,  existed to mediate 
between an aggrieved public, including prisoners, and an offending public office or 
institution .  It had n either  decision -making nor adjudicative powers but helped 
citizens obtain access to justice , advised government entities on citizen rights, and  
published reports.  During the year , the government implemented  and train ed local  
human rights committees  at the provincial, municipal, and communal levels.  
These committees were  composed of government representatives , civil society 
members, journalists , religious  representatives , and traditional authorities.   The 
committees we re tasked with gathering information and reporting monthly on 
human rights matters  within their area.   Those reports were not publicly available  
as of year ’s end . 
Page 20
Page 21:
Section 6 . Discrimination and Societal Abuses  
Women 
Rape and Domestic Violence :  Rape, including spousal rape  and intimate partner 
rape, is illegal and punishable by up to 12  years ’ imprisonment  if convicted , 
depending on aggravating situations.  The government did not enforce the law 
effectively.  Limited investigative resources, poor forensic capabilities, and an 
ineffective judicial system prevented prosecution of most cases.  The Ministry of 
Justice and Human Rights worked with the Ministry of Interior to increase the number of women  police officers and to improve police response to rape 
allegations.  
The law criminalizes domestic violence and penalizes offenders with prison sentences of up to eight years and monetary fines , depending on the severity of 
their crime .  The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights maintained a program with 
the Ang olan Bar Association to give free legal assistance to women survivors of 
domestic abuse  and established counseling centers to help families. 
According to the Ministry of Social Action, Family , and Women Promotion, 
during the year there were 2,929 cases report ed to the care centers of family -based 
violence , of which 2,297 victims were women , while the Criminal Investigation 
Services registered 4,905 cases of domestic violence.  Prosecutions were 
reportedly rare.  
Sexual Harassment :  Sexual hara ssment was common and not illegal.  It may be 
prosecuted, however,  under assault and battery and defamation statutes, but in 
practice prosecutions were rare . 
Reproductive Rights:   There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary 
sterilization on the part of government authorities. 
Persons living in rural areas faced more barriers to access of sexual and 
reproductive health services and postabortion emergency services than urban 
dwellers due to a lack of resources and health progra ms in those areas.  According 
to 2015- 16 World Health Organization (WHO) data, 62 percent of women between 
the ages of 15 and 49 made their own informed decisions regarding reproductive 
Page 21
Page 22:
health care, contraceptive use, and sexual relations.  Some cultural views, such as 
that women have a responsibility to bear children, and religious objections to using 
contraception limited access to reproductive health services.  The WHO reported there were four nursing and midwifery personnel per 10,000 inhabitants in the  
country (2010 -18 data).  For survivors of sexual violence, the law on domestic 
violence provides for legal and medical assistance, access to shelter spaces, and 
priority care assistance to obtain legal evidence of the crime.  Emergency 
contraception was available as clinical management of rape.  
According to a 2017 WHO report, the country’ s maternal mortality rate was 241 
deaths per 100,000 live births, which was a significant reduction from the rates of 
431 deaths in 2007 and 827 deaths in 2000.  High maternal mortality was due to inadequate access to health facilities before, during, and after giving birth, a lack of skilled obstetric care, and early pregnancy.  The WHO data reported a high 
adolescent birth rate of 163 births per 1,000 women between 15 and 19.  A UN 
Population Fund report found that six of 10 teenage girls who abandon ed school 
did so due to pregnancy.  According to 2010 -19 data, 30 percent of women of 
reproductive age had their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods.  UNICEF  reported in 2016 that 50 percent of births in the country were 
attended by skilled health personnel.  
According to an official in the Ministry of Public Administration, Labor , and 
Social Secu rity, lack of  running water and sanitary facilities at some school s 
disproportionately affected teenage  girls, causing them to not attend school during  
their period.  The cumulative effect of lost class time was detrimental to their 
success in school, leading struggling students to drop out and enter the work force.  
Discrimination :  Under the constitution and law, women enjoy the same rights 
and legal status as men.  The government, however,  did not enforce the law 
effectively, and  societal discrimination against women remained a problem, 
particularly in rural areas .  Customary law prevailed over civil law, particularly in 
rural areas, and at times had a negative effect on a woman ’s legal right to inherit 
property . 
The law provides for equal pay for equal work, although women generally held low-level positions.   There were legal restrictions on women ’s employment in 
Page 22
Page 23:
occupations and industries compared to men, including in jobs deemed hazardous, 
factory jobs, and those in the mining, agriculture, and energy sectors. 
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination 
A 2021  revision of the law  contained  several  provisions that criminalize 
discrimination based on skin color, race, and ethnicity.   The Human Rights 
National Plan  2020 -2022  contains policies to mitigate racial discrimination.  
Reports of raci al or ethnic violence were rare. 
Children 
Birth Registration :  Citizenship is derived by birth within the country or from 
one’s parents.  Although birth registration is universalized, t he government does 
not register all births immediately.  According to the 2014 census , approximately 
13.7 million citizens  (46 percent of the population) lacked birth registration 
documents.   In June  the government announced it had registered six  million 
persons since starting  a large -scale birth registration  program  in 2019.  The 
program, however , was intended to finish by the year ’s end.  On October 9, 
President Louren ço created the Interministerial Commission for the Identification 
of the Constrain ts and Presentation of Solutions for the Expansion  of the Proce ss of 
Birth Registration and Issuance of ID Cards.  
The government permit ted children to attend school without birth registration, but 
only through  the sixth grade.  
Education :  Education is tuition -free and compulsory for documented children 
through the ninth grade .  Students in public schools often faced significant 
additional expenses such as books or irregular fees paid  directly to education 
officials  to guarantee a place .  When  parents were unable to pay the fees, their 
children were often unable to attend school.   The Ministry of Education  estimate d 
that one  to two million children did not attend school because of a shortage of 
teachers and schools.  
There were reports that parents, especially in more rural areas, were more likely to send boys to school rather than girls.  According to UNESCO, enrollment rates were higher for boys than for girls, especially at the secondary level.  
Page 23
Page 24:
Child Abuse :  Child abuse was widespread.  Reports of physical abuse within the 
family were commonplace, and local officials largely tolerated abuse  due to lack of 
capacity within institutions to  provide appropriate care.   The Ministry of Social 
Assistance  offers programs for child abuse victims and other vul nerable children.  
Nevertheless, nationwide implementation of such programs remained a problem.  
In 2020  the Ministry of Culture and the National Institute for Children ( INAC ) 
launched a hotline to report violence against children.  In March, INAC reported at 
least 4,700 children had been victims of sexual abuse during the previous 12 
months , which was similar to the number it reported in 2021 .  INAC stated it had 
launched a campaign in 2021 emphasizing psychosocial support to child victims of sexual abuse and their families, lectures, roundtables, and protests condemning 
violence against children.  
According to the  local UNICEF office, there were reports that more than  50,000 
children  suffered from some form of child abuse . 
There were anecdotal reports  that some communities abused women and children 
due to accusations the latter practiced witchcraft.  INAC had educational initiatives and emergency programs to assist children accused of witchcraft.  
Child, Early , and Forced Marriage :  The legal age for marriage with parental 
consent is 15 for girls and 16 for boys .  The government did not enforce this 
restriction effectively, and the traditional age of marriage among  lower income 
groups coincided with the onset of puberty . 
Sexual Exploitation of Children :  Human trafficking and commercial sexual 
exploitation of children is illegal.  Police did not actively enforce laws against 
commercial sexual exploitation, and local NGOs expressed concern regarding  the 
sexual exploitation of children.  The law prohibits the use of children to produce  
pornography ; however, it does not prohibit the procuring or offering of a child for 
the production of pornography, or the use, procuring, or offering of a child for 
pornographic performances. 
Sexual relations between  an adult and a child younger than  12 are considered rape , 
and conviction carries a potential penalty of eight to 12 years’ imprisonment.  
Sexual relations with a child between the ages of 12 and 17 are considered sexual 
Page 24
Page 25:
abuse , and convicted offenders may receive sentences from two to eight years in 
prison .  The legal age for consensual sex is 18.   Limited investigative resources 
and an inadequate judicial system prevented prosecution of most cases.  There 
were reports of prosecutions during the year. 
Displaced Children:   Extreme poverty and  the economic decline during recent 
years led to an increase in the number of children living on the street,  especially in 
urban areas of the capital .  These children , estimated to number from the hundreds 
to several thousand,  did not have access to health care or education, often resort ed 
to begging or trash picking for survival, and live d in conditions placing them at 
great  risk for exploitation. 
Antisemitism 
There is a Jewish community of approximately 350 persons,  primarily  resident 
Israelis .  There were no reports of antis emitic acts.  
Trafficking in Persons  
See the Department of State ’s Trafficking in Persons Report  at 
https: //www.state.gov/trafficking- in-persons- report/ . 
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based on 
Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or Sex 
Characteristics 
Criminalization:   The constitution prohibits all forms of discrimination but does 
not specifically address sexual orientation or gender identity.  In 2021 changes to 
the penal code took effect that decriminalize d same- sex sexual relations and 
criminalize d acts of violence or discrimination based on a person ’s sexual 
orientation.  Transgender and intersex persons are not specifically covered in the 
legislation, nor does it recognize same -sex marriage, leading to problems i n 
adoption and family planning, accompanying family into health -care facilities, and 
obtaining appropriate identity documents.  
Violence against LGBTQI+ Persons:   Local NGOs reported that lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex ( LGBTQI+ ) persons faced violence  and 
Page 25
Page 26:
harassment, and that p olice  often  tolerated violence against LGBTQI+ individuals 
or against those reporting abuse by failing to investigate or prosecut e. 
Discrimination:   Discrimination based on sexual orientation was criminalized in 
2021, but  LGBTQI+ persons rarely reported incidents to police, and when 
reported, LGBTQI+ persons asserted that police sometimes  refused to register the 
grievances.  LGBTQI+ NGOs assert that societal biases against LGBTQI+ identity 
result in discrimination in family life, education, health  services , and employment.  
The Ministry of Health continued to collaborate with the National Institute to Fight 
HIV/AIDS to improve access to health services and sexual education for the 
LGBTQI+ community.  
The Movement EU SOU TRANS Angola reported 10 cases of discrimination 
against transgender women sex workers in Luanda between 2020 and year ’s end.  
The group described eight of the incidents as cases of arbitrary detention due to 
intolerance and transphobia, one incident of sexual violence by a police officer, 
and one case of pretrial detention due to charges of sexual abuse of minors.  
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:   The government does not allow 
individuals to change their gender identity marker on legal and identifying 
documents to bring them into alignment with their gender identity.  Neither is there 
an option of identifying as “ nonbinary/intersex/gender no -conforming” or other 
gender identity.  
Involuntary or Coercive  Medical or Psychological Practices Specifically 
Targeting LGBTQI+ Individuals:   Involuntary or coercive medical or 
psychological practices specifically targeting LGBTQI+ individ uals occurred but 
were not well documented.   A transgender  person reported an involuntary 
“exorcism,” for instance , because of  perceived sexual identity.  
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:   
There were no legal restrictions on freedom of expression, association, or peaceful 
assembly placed on LGBTQI+ groups , some of which have legal recognition as 
NGOs in the country . 
Page 26
Page 27:
Persons with Disabilities  
The law prohibits discrimination against persons with physical, sensory, 
intellectual, and mental disabilities, but the government did not effectively enforce 
these prohibitions.  T he constitution grants persons with disabilities full rights 
without restriction and calls on the government to adopt national policies to prevent disability ; treat, rehabilitate, and integrate persons with disabilities ; support  
their families ; remove obstacles to their mobility ; educate society regarding  
disability ; and encourage learning and training opportunities for persons with 
disabilities. 
The law also institutes a quota system to encourage the public and private sector s 
to employ  more persons with disabilities , with the public -sector quota  set at 4 
percent  of total employees and the private -sector quota at 2 percent .  The 
government official responsible for overseeing programs to promote inclusion for 
persons with disabilities acknowledged that both the private and public sectors 
failed to meet the quota system established by law.  Persons with disabilities 
included more than 80,000 survivors of land mine s and other explosive remnants 
of war .  Because of limited government resources and uneven availability, only 30 
percent of persons with disabilities were able to take advantage of state -provided 
services such as physical rehabilitation, schooling, training, or counseling. 
Women with disabilities were reported to be vulnerable to sexual abuse and 
abandonment when pregnant.  The Ministry of Social Assistance  sought to address 
problems facing persons with disabilities, including veterans with disabilities, and 
several government  entities supported programs to assist individuals disabled by 
landmine incidents. 
Government inaction to enforce these laws limited the ability of persons with 
disabilities to participate fully in civil life.  Accommodations  were made in the 
August national elections , however,  to assist persons with disabilities to fully 
participate.  
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination 
Discrimination against those with HIV or AIDS is illegal, but lack of enforcement 
Page 27
Page 28:
allowed employers to discriminate against persons with HIV.  There were no 
media reports of violence against persons with HIV.  Reports from local and 
international health NGOs suggested discrimination against persons with HIV was common.  The government ’s National Institute to Fight HIV/ AIDS include d 
sensitivity and antidiscrimination  training for its employees when they test and 
counsel HIV patients.  
Section 7 . Worker Rights  
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective Bargaining  
The law provides for most workers to form and join independent unions, bargain 
collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibit s some  forms of antiunion 
discrimination but does not explicitly prohibit employer interference with union 
activity .  Legal restrictions limit these right s.  The law does not permit members of 
the armed forces , polic e, firefighters, members of sovereign bodies, and public 
prosecutors  to form and join independent unions or initiate strikes .  The 
government generally did not effectively enforce labor laws.  Labor courts 
functioned but were overburdened by a backlog of cases and inadequate resources.  
The law provides for penalties for violations of the law and labor contracts, which 
are commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights, but the penalties were not an effective deterrent due to the inefficient functioning of the courts.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  
To establish a trade union, at least 30 percent of workers in an economic sector in a province must follow a registration process and obtain authorization from governme nt officials.  The law provides for the right to collective bargaining 
except in the civil service .  The government labels many workers “essential,” 
beyond those sectors defined as essential by the International Labor Organization 
(ILO), including the transport sector, communications, waste management and treatment, and fuel distribution.  In exceptional circumstances involving national 
interests, authorities have the power to requi sition workers in the essential services 
sector .  While the law allows unions to conduct their activities without government 
interference, it also places some restrictions on their ability to  strike .  Before 
engaging in a strike, workers must negotiate with their employer  for at least 20 
days prior to a work stoppage .  Should they fail to negotiate , the government may 
Page 28
Page 29:
deny the right to strike .  The government may intervene in labor disputes that 
affect national security and energy sector s.  Collective labor  disputes are to be 
settled through compulsory arbitration by the Ministry of Public Administration, 
Labor , and Social Security (Ministry of Labor) .  The law prohibit s employer 
retribution against strikers, but it does not contain effective measures to deter such 
retribution.   The law  permits the government to force workers back to work for 
“breaches of worker discipline ” or participation in unauthorized strikes.  
Nonetheless, the law prohibits antiunion discrimination and stipulates that worker complaints should be adjudicated in the labor court.  The Ministry of Labor  had a 
hotline and two service centers in Luanda for workers who believed their rights 
had been vi olated.  By  law employers are required to reinstate workers who have 
been dismissed for union activities. 
During the year , there were several strikes in the public and private sector 
concerning  disputes between  employers and workers.  There were also alleg ations 
of retribution against strikers during the year.   Between March and April, d octors 
undertook a 35 -day strike after negotiations with the government for increased 
salaries and improved hospital conditions failed.  The Angolan Doctor ’s Union 
reported that the Ministry of Health, allegedly working with hospital directors, had 
suspended physicians ’ salaries , prevented doctors from entering their workplaces 
to perform minimal services, and threatened to fire them.  
The government generally did not effectively enforce labor laws.  Labor courts 
functioned but were overburdened by a backlog of cases and inadequate resources.  
The law provides for penalties for violations of the la w and labor contracts , which 
are commensu rate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights, but 
the penalties were not an effective deterrent due to the inefficient functioning of the courts.   Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were not generally 
respected .  Government approval is required to form and join unions, which were 
hampered by membership and legalization matters .  Labor unions, independent of 
those run by the government, worked to increase their influence, but the ruling 
MPLA party dominate d the labor movement because of its historical close 
relationship with labor unions and from the strong financial base of the nation’ s 
largest union, of which the MPLA wa s a part.  
Page 29
Page 30:
The government was the country’ s largest employer, and the  Ministry of Labor  
mandated government worker wages with no negotiation with the unions.   In 2020 , 
President Lourenco  created an advisory body, the Economic and Social Council, 
with 45 members representing large s ectors of the country ’s society but did no t 
include labor representatives.   Public -sector labor unions us ed strikes and protests 
to advance labor rights.  In January taxi drivers held a large strike  to protest the 
admin istration ’s COVID -19 restrictions and political grievances.  
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor  
The law prohibits and criminalizes all forms of forced or compulsory labor .  The 
government did not effectively enforce the law due in part to an insufficient 
number of inspectors and to systemic corruption. 
Forced labor of adults  occurred in fisheries, agriculture, construction, domestic 
service, and artisanal diamond-mining sectors, particularly in Lunda  Norte and 
Lunda Sul  Provinces .  Migrant workers were subject to seizure of passports, 
threats, denial of food, and confinement.  Forced child labor occurred (see section 
7.c.).  See also the Department of State ’s Trafficking in Persons Report at 
https://www.state.gov/trafficking- in-persons- report/ . 
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for Employment  
See the Department of Labor ’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at 
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/ . 
d. Discrimination with Respect to Employment and Occupation 
The labor law prohibits discrimination in employment and occupation based on 
race, color , sex, ethnic origin, country  origin and social condition, religion,  
political opinion, union membership , disability , or language, and the government 
in general effectively enforced the law in the formal sector .  The ILO, however,  
noted the law did not clearly define discrimination.   The constitution prohibits all 
forms of discrimination.  The country’ s law bans employment discrimination on 
the basis of  sexual orientation and criminalizes sexual harassment.   The law 
provides for equal pay for equal work, but gender pay disparities exist ed.  The law 
provides that both employers and workers  be treated  with respec t.  There were 
Page 30
Page 31:
legal restrictions on women ’s employment in occupations considered dangerous, in 
factories, and in industries such as mining, agriculture, and energy.  
The law provides  working mothers nine  weeks of maternity leave and four weeks 
of prematernity leave before child birth  and one  day of leave each month in the next 
15 weeks after the birth, while working father s receive  leave on the day of the  
child ’s birth.  
The government did not effectively e nforce the law, although penalties, when 
applied, were commensurate with those for other laws related to civil rights.  
Penalties were sometimes applied, but t here were no known prosecutions of 
official or private -sector gender -based discrimination in employment or 
occupation.  Persons with disabilities found it difficult to gain access to public or 
private facilities, and it was difficult for such persons to participate in the education system and thus find employm ent.  In the past, there were  also 
complaints of discrimination against foreign workers.  There were no known prosecutions for discrimination in employment.   Penalties were not sufficient to 
deter violations.  
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work  
Wage and Hour  Laws :  A minimum wage for the formal sector exists and varies 
by sector.  The UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights raised 
concern s regard ing the wide disparities of minimum wage by sector and the 
possibility this may undervalue work in wome n-dominated sectors.   The lowest 
minimum wage  was for  agricultural work and was set below the  UN Development 
Program’ s official line of poverty.  The minimum wage for the formal sector may 
be updated annually  or when the government assesses economic conditions 
warrant.  The minimum wage law does not cover workers in informal sectors, such 
as street vendors  and subsistence  farmers. 
The standard workweek  in the private sector is 44 hours, while in the public sec tor 
it is 35 hours.   In both sectors, the law mandates at least one unbroken period of 24 
hours of rest per week.  In the private sector, when employees engage in shift work or a variable weekly schedule, they may  work up to 54 hours per week before the 
employer must pay overtime .  In the formal sector , there is a prohibition on 
Page 31
Page 32:
excessive compulsory overtime, defined as more than two hours a day, 40 hours a 
month, or 200 hours a year .  The law also provides for paid annual holidays.  By 
law employers must provide, at a minimum, a bonus amounting to 50 percent of monthly salary to employees each year in December and an annual vacation .  The 
law does not cover domestic workers, but a 2016 presidential decree extended 
some protections and enforcement standards to domestic workers.   Workweek 
standards were not enforced unless employees filed a formal complaint with the 
Ministry of Labor .  The  law protec ts foreign workers with permanent legal status 
or a temporary work visa.  
Occupational Safety and Health:   Occupational safety and health (OSH)  
standards are required for all sectors of the economy.  Employees have the right to 
remove  themselves from hazard ous working conditions without jeopardy to their 
employment . 
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:   The government effectively enforced the 
minimum wage law within the formal labor sector, and penalties were commensurate with those for similar infractions.  The  Ministry of Labor is charged 
with implementing and enforcing the law.  An insufficient number of adequately 
trained labor inspectors hampered enforcement efforts.  Inspectors have the 
authority to conduct unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions, but some companies received advance warning of impending labor inspections.   The 
government did not always proactively enforce occupational safety and health standards nor investigate private company operations unless complaints were made by NGOs and labor u nions.  
Informal Sector:   As much as 80 percent of the workforce was employed  in the 
informal economy .  The rate was higher in rural areas than u rban areas  (93 and 67 
percent , respectively) .  Even in the country’s rapidly growing urban areas, self -
employed informal workers provide d essential services such as water, food , and 
transportation.  Other  common types of informal work include d agriculture, 
commerce and trading, domestic work,  security guards, and raising cattle.   The 
government began  job skills training programs to reduc e informal employment, as 
well as efforts to reduce barriers to formalization and promote greater awareness of 
the advantages and protection that come with the formaliza tion. 
Page 32
Page 33:
Government regulation and closure of market stalls during COVID- 19 forced 
many informal workers to set up shop in the streets, apartment building entrances , 
or their own doorsteps to sell food and handcrafts such as leather sandals, furniture, 
and imported goods .  Informal markets were the main source of food for most  of 
the population.  Informal money changers operate d a parallel financial system to 
exchange weak local currency for dollars.  Some informal- sector workers joined  
unions, such as the National Federation of Unions of Food Industry, Commerce , 
and Hotels .  Most workers in the informal sector and part -time workers were not 
covered by wage or occupational safety standards or social protections. 
Page 33
